>> Spencer Schneidenbach: I kinda wanna
to talk about just a few things around
.NET specifically,
including the CLR and, of course, C#.
So you can think of .NET just as a brand.
It's kind of the big umbrella that kind of
encompasses all of the things inside of
.NET.
So that includes things like the CLR, or
things like the C# Dev Kit extension for
Visual Studio Code, or
Visual Studio, right?
So .NET is just the name for
all of those things.
And as I mentioned, it's mostly
referred to the development platform,
and it does support multiple
programming languages,
which I'll mention here briefly,
and the vast standard library.
So .NET, mostly just a name at this point.
The CLR, the Common Language Runtime, is a
very crucial component of the .NET system.
If you're familiar with the Java Virtual
Machine, the JVM, it's very akin to that.
So it's the execution environment for
all .NET programs.
So it manages memory allocation and
deallocation,
which is reference types usually
done with garbage collection,
which we'll touch on
when we get to that part.
It ensures execution security,
type safety.
So all of the types that we talk about
inside of C#, they're all referred to
as CLR types, because they all kinda
boil down to that common language.
And then, of course,
it handles exception management.
Exception management is a .NET feature,
it's not a C# feature.
So it's a feature of all languages.
All languages have to handle
exceptions and deal with exceptions.
So fun fact,
all .NET languages compile down to
what's called intermediary language,
which is kind of like, you can think of it
a little bit like assembly for the CLR.
Occasionally, it's fun to go in and
see source that's decompiled into IL
just to see what it does under the hood.
But it's not something that I read,
and it's not necessary to know at all,
it's just a fun fact for
all intents and purposes.
So C# is the primary
language used with .NET.
It's object-oriented,
which we will talk about as we get along
into the course, and it's type-safe.
It's a C syntax language, so it's very
much like Java, C++, C, JavaScript,
in that it's very familiar.
If you've ever used
those languages before,
it's gonna feel very familiar,
it's gonna feel at home.
And every release, it's continuously
evolving with new features.
I will touch on quite a few
of them in this course.
I'll talk about the ones that I use,
the ones that I don't use, and
everything in-between.
There are a couple of
other .NET languages.
There is Visual Basic.NET which is an
object-oriented version of Visual Basic,
and Spencer's first .NET language.
So Visual Basic before .NET was developed,
and it got all the way up to VB6
before they transitioned to .NET,
and they've never looked back.
I've used both, I've used VB6.
I still use Visual Basic .NET
occasionally, because some of the code
bases that my company manages
are all Visual Basic languages.
That's mostly .NET frameworks stuff.
I have yet to see Visual Basic used in
.NET Core in the wild as a consultant,
but it is possible, you can actually
write .NET Core code in Visual Basic.
So it's possible.
And then F#,
which is a really cool little language.
The syntax is based on OCaml.
And it's a functional first language, so
it was really designed to be
a functional first language.
So it's really cool.
I would say that I see way more of C# and
VB .NET in the wild.
F# is not really much widely adopted or
used,
although I have seen some outfits use it,
I've seen some shops use it.
I don't work on any
production code that's F#.
But it is a cool language if only
because it's helped me learn and
become a better C# developer.
And then lastly, NuGet.
Back in the day of early .NET,
there was no package manager.
You copied around DLLs or
you installed them into Windows,
into what was called the GAC,
or Global Assembly Cache.
Those days, thankfully, are long over.
NuGet is the package manager for .NET.
It actually started as
a community project, and
now it's just fully integrated
into the .NET ecosystem.
It is the way to install and
use different packages inside of .NET,
so very typical, very akin to a PIP or
an NPM for other ecosystems.
I like the house analogy where .NET is
the frame, the CLR is the foundation,
plumbing, and electricity, and
C#, we're all the bricklayers,
we're all the woodworkers.
And the C# is the brick, and the wood,
and the insulation, and the flooring, and
NuGet is the hardware store.
>> Speaker 2: What about [INAUDIBLE].
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Most of what
we're gonna be doing in this particular
course, look,
is just kinda staying in the command line.
We will talk about web apps and we'll
talk about building a web app with .NET.
But a lot of what we're gonna be doing
is looking at language features.
And so console is more than sufficient for
doing stuff like that, for looking at
the language features in particular.
I think web development is
probably .NET best use.
I think that ASP NET Core is my
favorite web framework of all time.
And you can do stuff,
like web applications.
You can use a JSX similar,
it's akin to it.
It's called Razor syntax, JSX being for
React and Razor being for ASP.NET.
You can use that to
build web applications.
You can use it to build APIs, which
will be the focus of the next course,
is really digging into APIs, which is
where I spend the majority of my time,
as well as microservices, because you can
squeeze so much performance out of .NET.
And because they're so small and
the code bases are so manageable,
you can absolutely, and I do, use ASP.NET
core for microservices frequently.
Blazor is another technology,
got mentioned by the chat,
which is kind of their single
page application story.
Blazor is really neat.
It's not something I've
seen a lot in the wild, and
I haven't used a ton of it myself.
I have used it, and
of what I've seen, I really like.
It really has that kind of SPA,
single-page application, interactivity
like a React page does, which I think
is really valuable and really useful.
But most of what I've
worked on are APIs or
even ASP.NET Core web applications,
or microservices.
So cross-platform development,
so back when iOS and Android,
they released the SDKs and
they really started to proliferate,
Mono came behind and created something
called MonoTouch, which was binders.
They had C# wrappers over all of
those APIs inside of those SDKs.
And that, eventually, became Xamarin.
Xamarin then begat some cross-platform.
In many ways,
it actually kind of led the way.
It just didn't get widely adopted
in terms of write it once and
then run it on both platforms.
So it really did that early on, and
it found a lot of success there.
Well, Xamarin,
which was a separate company,
was bought eventually by Microsoft,
released for
free, and then transitioned to what's
called MAUI, or multi-platform app UI.
It allows you to do
cross-platform development.
So you can run it on iOS.
You can run, theoretically, these programs
on IOS, Android, Mac, Windows, Linux.
And its real strong use case is a single
code base across multiple platforms.
I'd say that in the current state,
October 9th, 2024,
I would say that MAUI has some work to do
in order to really be a viable product.
A lot of people use it for business.
I have friends that are .NET consultants,
but they're purely .NET.
I will say that I chose React Native for
my company and I haven't looked back.
I think it has a stronger cross-platform
story if I'm being honest.
But .NET MAUI does exist, and
they are improving it all the time.
They are making improvements to it,
so actively developed for sure.
And then, of course,
we got good old Windows.
So they have Windows Forms and
Windows Presentation Foundation,
which have been around for
years and years.
Both of them are, if you're working on,
and I know that there are lots of use
cases where people are still
building WinForms apps.
I have not worked on them in a full-time
capacity in a long time, but
there's still a lot of code out
there that runs on web forms,
that runs Windows Presentation Foundation.
So it's out there.
These are Windows-only frameworks,
which is fine.
They're very mature, they're very useful
if you're working in those environments.
So just know that they exist.
And then as I mentioned, the cloud and
microservices, so Azure Functions,
obviously, Azure and .NET love each other.
There's a lot of Azure support for
.NET and vice versa.
So all of the kind of the things that you
wanna do in the cloud, either serverless
computing or containerized applications,
you can do those very easily with .NET.
And there's a ton of literature, and a ton
of resources out there for doing that.
It's outside the scope of this course,
but it's out there.
>> Speaker 3: What are your thoughts
on JavaScript frameworks like React and
Vue versus Microsoft's
approach with Blazor?
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: That's
a really good question.
They can solve very similar problems.
They could solve the same problems.
You could absolutely write
applications in React with
an ASP.NET Core backend, and
write a very similar and
just as good application with Blazor and
ASP.Net core in the backend.
The reason I give React the nod is
because, again, of that network effect.
Blazor hasn't seen a huge
amount of adoption.
It has seen plenty, but not enough for
me to kind of consider it.
I don't wanna use it for high-leverage
applications, because, frankly,
I'm a consultant and I know that I'm not
the only developer that's gonna go and
work on this code base.
So I wanna give the companies that I
work with the best shot to find React
developers, and
there are React developers everywhere.